---
title: 'Console Application'
---

# Console Application

Let's start with a mandatory Hello World example. There is a Hello World example in the
[[Introduction#well-defined-language|overview section]], but this time we will create a
real-world project.

We will start with a simple Qbs project file:
```qml title="myproject.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-1/myproject.qbs:snippet0"
```
Here, we set the [[Project::name|name]] of the project to `"My Project"` – it is mainly
used for IDEs but can also be used to reference a project when setting properties from
command-line. We also set the [[Project::minimumQbsVersion|minimumQbsVersion]] – this property
can be useful if the project depends on features that are not present in earlier Qbs
versions.

The [[Project::references|references]] property contains the path to a file
that describes our application. This file is located in a separate `app` directory –
typically, projects tend to have quite a complicated structure but Qbs does not enforce any
specific layout, so we will simply put each product in a separate directory.

The application file sets several properties:
```qml title="app/app.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-1/app/app.qbs:snippet0"
```
The [[Product::name|name]] property identifies the product.
The [[Product::targetName|targetName]] property sets the name of the resulting binary
(without the `.exe` extension on Windows, which is appended automatically). By default,
[[Product::targetName|targetName]] defaults to [[Product::name|name]]. The
[[Product::files|files]] property contains a single `main.c` file which is a trivial
_hello world_ application:
```c title="app/main.c"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-1/app/main.c:snippet0"
```
We set [[Product::consoleApplication|consoleApplication]] to `true` to indicate that our
application is going to be used from a terminal. For example, on Windows, this will spawn a
new console window if you double-click the resulting binary, while on macOS it will create a
standalone binary file instead of an
[application bundle](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/CoreFoundation/Conceptual/CFBundles/BundleTypes/BundleTypes.html).

By default, the [[Application::install|CppApplication.install]] property is `false` and thus
Qbs does not install the binary. If the [[Application::install|install]] property is
`true`, when building a project, Qbs will also install it into an _installation root_
folder which by default is named `install-root` and located under the build directory. This
folder will contain only resulting artifacts without the build leftovers and files will have
the same layout as in the target system. The [[Application::install|install]] property should
be set to `true` for all products that are to be distributed.
See the [[Installing Files]] section for more details.

We can now build and run our application from the project directory:
```sh
chapter-1 $ qbs build
...
Building for configuration default
compiling main.c [My Application]
...
linking myapp [My Application]
...
Build done for configuration default.

chapter-1 $ qbs run
...
Starting target. Full command line: .../default/install-root/usr/local/bin/myapp
Hello, world
```

The Qbs output to console and default installation location may vary between different
platforms.

In most cases, Qbs should be able to find the default compiler (for example, GCC or
Clang on Linux, Visual Studio on Windows, or Xcode on macOS), but if that's not the
case, see the [[Configuring Profiles and Preferences|configuring]] section.

In the following chapters, we will continue to improve our project: we will add a library and
make it configurable.
