---
title: 'Static Library'
---

# Static Library

Let's add a static library to our project so we can reuse some code. Analogous to what we did
for the application, we put the file into the `lib` directory and add it to the
[[Project::references|references]] property in our project. The modified project may look
like this:

```qml title="myproject.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/myproject.qbs:snippet0"
```

Let's take a look at the the library file now:

```qml title="lib/lib.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.qbs:snippet0"
```

It contains the [[StaticLibrary]] item which sets the [[Product::type|type]] of the product
to `"staticlibrary"` and sets some defaults like where to install that library.
As before, we set the [[Product::files|files]] property with a header:

```c title="lib/lib.h"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.h:snippet0"
```

And we set the implementation file of our library:

```c title="lib/lib.c"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.c:snippet0"
```

We will keep our library really simple – it only contains one function, which we will later use
in our application. The source file requires a `"CRUCIAL_DEFINE"` to be
passed to a preprocessor. That is why we set the [[cpp::defines|cpp.defines]] property:

```qml
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.qbs:snippet1"
```

Note that unlike the [[CppApplication]] item, the [[StaticLibrary]] does not pull in the
dependency on the [[cpp]] module automatically – that is why we have to pull it in manually
using the [[Depends]] item. Without the [[cpp]] module, Qbs would not know how to turn a
`.c` file into an object file and the object file into a library. See
[[Rules and Product Types]] for details.

Next, we need to tell Qbs where to look for public headers of our library when building
products that depend on it. By default, Qbs knows nothing about the layout of our
library, so we tell it to look for headers in the library's source directory using the
[[Export]] item:

```qml
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.qbs:snippet2"
```

You can export any [[Module]] property within the [[Export]] item – it will be merged in the
depending product with other properties. For example, you can export
[[cpp::defines|cpp.defines]] or specific [[cpp::commonCompilerFlags|compiler flags]] that
are required to use this product.

We depend on the [[cpp]] module twice – once within the [[StaticLibrary]]
item and once in the [[Export]] item. This is because by default Qbs does not export anything
when depending on this product and the dependencies in this item (as well as
properties set in this item) are private to this product while dependencies and properties
set in the [[Export]] item are for export only.

Finally, we have some Apple-specific settings. You can skip this part of the tutorial if you
are using some other platform. We depend on the [[bundle]] module and set the
[[bundle::isBundle|bundle.isBundle]] to false:

```qml
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-2/lib/lib.qbs:snippet3"
```

By default, Qbs builds static and dynamic libraries as
[Frameworks](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/MacOSX/Conceptual/BPFrameworks/Concepts/WhatAreFrameworks.html)
on macOS. So, to keep things simple, we disable the framework build and build a plain old
static library file here.
