---
title: 'Dynamic Library'
---

# Dynamic Library

Let's now turn our static library into a dynamic library. It is a bit trickier with dynamic
libraries since several things should be tweaked. First, we need to be able to mark methods
(or classes) in our library as exported. Second, we need to tell our application where to look
for our library at run time using [rpaths](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rpath).

Some compilers, like MSVC, require us to mark which symbols we want to export or import. The
[canonical](https://stackoverflow.com/a/6840659) way would be to define some helper macros.
Let's start with a header that defines those helper macros:
```c title="lib/lib_global.h"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-3/lib/lib_global.h:snippet0"
```
This header defines the `MYLIB_EXPORT` macro that expands either to an "export" or to an
"import" directive based on the presence of the `MYLIB_LIBRARY` macro. We can use this macro
to mark a function as follows:
```c title="lib/lib.h"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-3/lib/lib.h:snippet0"
```
The modified library product may look like this:

```qml title="lib/lib.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-3/lib/lib.qbs:snippet0"
```
The most important change is that we changed the item type from [[StaticLibrary]] to
[[DynamicLibrary]]. We also added the `MYLIB_LIBRARY` to the list of
[[cpp::defines|defines]]. We do this only when building the library but we are not exporting
it – that way the users of our library will have methods marked for import rather than export.

Finally, we set [[cpp::sonamePrefix|cpp.sonamePrefix]] to `"@rpath"`. This is required only
for Apple platforms, see
[Run-Path Dependent Libraries](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/DeveloperTools/Conceptual/DynamicLibraries/100-Articles/RunpathDependentLibraries.html)
for details.

It is also required to set [[cpp::rpaths|cpp.rpaths]] in our application file. Since the
library is installed to the `lib` directory and the application is installed to the `bin`
directory, we need to tell the loader to look in the `lib` directory. The
[[FileInfo#relativePath|FileInfo.relativePath]] method can help us:
```qml title="app/app.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-3/app/app.qbs:snippet0"
```
On Linux, this expression would be equivalent to this: `cpp.rpaths: ["$ORIGIN/../lib"]`.
Don't forget to `import qbs.FileInfo` in order to be able to use the
[[FileInfo]] extension.

To make the example complete, here's how the full `app/app.qbs` file should look like:
```qml
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-3/app/app.qbs:snippet1"
```
