---
title: 'Project Properties'
---

# Project Properties

It would be nice if our project was configurable. Let's add some properties to our root project
file:

```qml title="myproject.qbs" hl_lines="2-6"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-6/myproject.qbs:snippet0"
```

Now we can use those properties in our helper items and in products:

```qml title="qbs/imports/MyApplication.qbs" hl_lines="2 5"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-6/qbs/imports/MyApplication.qbs:snippet0"
```

Here, we access the project file using the special
[[Special Property Values#project|project]] value. If the nearest project in the project
tree does not have the desired property, Qbs looks it up in the parent project, potentially
all the way up to the top-level project.
We also use the [[Application::installDebugInformation|installDebugInformation]]
property here. By default, it has the same value as [[Application::install|install]] but we
want to make the debug information install optional.

Let's now disable the tests if `parent.withTests` (which in this case is an equivalent of `project.withTests`) is `false`:

```qml title="myproject.qbs" hl_lines="3-5"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-6/myproject.qbs:snippet1"
```

Here we use the [[Properties]] item within the [[SubProject]] item. This item allows to
override a subproject's properties which can be useful when adding some other Qbs project as a
Git submodule. Of course, it is not very useful in our particular case since we only set the
[[Project::condition|Project.condition]] property. We could achieve the same effect by
setting the [[SubProject::condition|condition]] property of the [[SubProject]] item:

```qml hl_lines="3"
SubProject {
    filePath: "test/test.qbs"
    condition: parent.withTests
}
```

Another way would be to disable the test product. That way, an IDE would still show the whole
project tree including disabled tests:

```qml title="qbs/imports/MyAutoTest.qbs" hl_lines="2"
MyApplication {
    condition: project.withTests
    type: base.concat(["autotest"])
}
```

Let's finally make our [[AutotestRunner]] configurable too:

```qml title="myproject.qbs" hl_lines="2-4"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-6/myproject.qbs:snippet2"
```

There are several ways to override project properties from the command line. First, the special
`project` variable can be used to set the properties of the top-level project:

```sh
$ qbs resolve project.withTests:false
```

You can also refer to properties using project's [[Project::name|name]]:

```sh
$ qbs resolve "projects.My Project.withTests:false"
```

This can again be useful for accessing the properties of external sub-projects. Note that since
the project name contains spaces, we use quotes here.
