---
title: 'Buildconfig Module'
---

# Buildconfig Module

In the previous chapter, we added some properties to our main [[Project]] file. While this is a
perfect approach for _public_ properties of the project, sometimes we want
to add some _private_ properties for better tuning. Of course, we could put everything
in the [[Project]] file, but that would make it very convoluted. Also, accessing the top-level
project all the way from products makes things strongly tied.

You can also use a [[Module]] that [[Product|products]] may depend on. That way, a
[[Product]] only uses properties of the module it depends on without the need to know about
the top-level project.

Let's create a file named `mybuildconfig.qbs` and put it into the
`qbs/modules/mybuildconfig` directory, near the `qbs/imports` directory:

```qml title="qbs/modules/mybuildconfig.qbs"
Module {
}
```

So far, this is just an empty [[Module]] so let's add some properties to it:

```qml title="qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-7/qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs:snippet0"
```

We added the `appInstallDir` and `libInstallDir` properties that will allow us to configure
the installation location of the our application and library, respectively.

Now we can use our module in the `MyApplication.qbs` item:

```qml title="qbs/imports/MyApplication.qbs" hl_lines="2-3"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-7/qbs/imports/MyApplication.qbs:snippet0"
```

We pull in the new module using the [[Depends]] item, similar to how we pulled in
the [[cpp]] module dependency earlier. We also set the [[Application::installDir|installDir]]
property to the corresponding module property, namely to `mybuildconfig.appInstallDir`.

Qbs [[Module|modules]] have the feature to _automatically export_ properties of other modules.
Those exported properties are merged in the resulting product. We can use this feature to set
the [[cpp::rpaths|cpp.rpaths]] in our module rather than in products:

```qml title="qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-7/qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs:snippet1"
```

Here, we inject the dependency on the [[cpp]] module and calculate the `libRPaths` property.
This is a relative path from the `product.installDir` (which is either `"bin"`
or `"lib"`, depending on product type to `libInstallDir`). Finally, we set
[[cpp::rpaths|cpp.rpaths]] to this property. This way, those `rpaths` will be automatically
exported to all products that depend on the `mybuildconfig` module.

Now, we can also use our new module in the library item:

```qml title="qbs/imports/MyLibrary.qbs"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-7/qbs/imports/MyLibrary.qbs:snippet0"
```

Let's change the library folder name from `"lib"` to `"lib64"` when building our project:

```sh
$ qbs modules.mybuildconfig.libDirName:lib64
...
$ ls default/install-root/usr/local/
bin    lib64
```
