---
title: 'Version Header'
---

# Version Header

To create new files, such as version headers, during the build, use [[Rules]]. Every command
Qbs executes, such as compile or linker commands, is described by a corresponding Rule in a
Module or a Product.

In this section, we will create a simple header with a string constant based on the variable
in our project.

First, we add this variable to our `mybuildconfig` module:

```qml title="qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs" hl_lines="4"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/qbs/modules/mybuildconfig/mybuildconfig.qbs:snippet0"
```

Next, we create a new file, `version.h.in`, located in the `version-header` directory. This
file contains the template for our header:

```c title="version-header/version.h.in" hl_lines="4"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version.h.in:snippet0"
```

Now we create a file called `version-header.qbs` in the same directory. This file contains
a [[Product]] with a [[Rule]] that turns the `version.h.in` into a real header.
Let's go through the contents of the file:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="1"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet0"
```

First, we import [[TextFile Service|TextFile]]. We will need this class to read the template
and write the resulting header. Second, we declare a new [[Product]] named `"version_header"`
and with the `"hpp"` type. This is the type of the artifact we will create in the Rule.
Third, we add the dependency on the `mybuildconfig` module to use the new
`mybuildconfig.productVersion` variable.

We also add a [[Group]] with the template file and assign the `version_h_in` tag to the file:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="9"
    --8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet1"
```

Qbs Rules work with file tags, instead of working with files directly, which makes
it easy to reuse rules. The name of the tag is chosen arbitrarily here. We could use the name
of the file as a tag, but to avoid confusion between file name and file tag, we use underscores
in the tag instead of dots.

Now we can create a Rule itself:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="14"
    --8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet2"
```

Here, we specify that our Rule takes files tagged as `"version_h_in"` and produces an
[[Artifact]] with the name `"version.h"` and tagged `"hpp"`. By default, files are created in
the [[Product::destinationDirectory|Product.destinationDirectory]] folder. We add the `"hpp"`
tag for the header as this is the tag the [[cpp|cpp module]] uses for headers. That way, Qbs
can track changes and process our generated file the same way it treats all other
headers. Note that earlier we set the product type to `"hpp"` as well. Qbs requires that
artifact type should match the product type directly or be accessible via the chain of Rules.
Otherwise, the Rule won't be executed. For details, see the [[Rules and Product Types]]
section.

The actual code generation happens in the [[Rule::prepare|Rule.prepare]] script:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="20"
        --8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet3"
```

In this script, we create a [[JavaScriptCommand]] object and set some meta properties, such as
the description and highlight. For details about Commands, see
[[Command and JavaScriptCommand]]. In the sourceCode variable, we create a JavaScript
function that opens the [[The inputs and outputs Variables|input file]], reads its content
using the [[TextFile Service|TextFile]] object, replaces the `"${PRODUCT_VERSION}"`
placeholder with the actual value in the `product.mybuildconfig.productVersion` variable, and
writes the resulting content into the [[The inputs and outputs Variables|output file]].

Finally, we export the [[Product::buildDirectory|exportingProduct.buildDirectory]] so that
products that depend on this product can include our generated header:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="40"
    --8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet4"
```

The full content of the file should look like this:

```qml title="version-header/version-header.qbs" linenums="1"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/version-header/version-header.qbs:snippet5"
```

Let's now add our Product into the root project so Qbs will be aware of it:

```qml title="myproject.qbs" hl_lines="4"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/myproject.qbs:snippet0"
```

We also need to add the dependency on the `"version_header"` to our application:

```qml title="app/app.qbs" hl_lines="3"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/app/app.qbs:snippet0"
```

Now we can include the header in the `main.c` file and print the contents of the string
constant:

```c title="app/main.c" hl_lines="2 10"
--8<-- "tutorial/chapter-9/app/main.c:snippet0"
```

Let's try and run our application. You should see something like this:

```sh
$ qbs run -p "My Application"
Starting target. Full command line: .../default/install-root/usr/local/bin/myapp
Hello, world
Hello from library
ProductVersion = 1.0.0  # (1)!
```

1. Here is our version!
